---
title: "A LAPF/phafin1-like protein regulates TORC1 and lysosomal membrane permeabilization in response to endoplasmic reticulum membrane stress"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2015-10-28-Pib2
excerpt: 'In this paper, we find Pib2 as a novel regulator of TORC1 signalling in yeast'
date: 2015-10-28
venue: 'Molecular Biology of the Cell'
paperurl: 'https://www.molbiolcell.org/doi/full/10.1091/mbc.e15-08-0581'
citation: 'Kim, A. (2015). &quot;A LAPF/phafin1-like protein regulates TORC1 and lysosomal membrane permeabilization in response to endoplasmic reticulum membrane stress&quot; <i>MBOC</i>. Dec 15;26(25):4631-45. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-08-0581. PubMed PMID: 26510498; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4678020.'
---
Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) is a poorly understood regulator of programmed cell death that involves leakage of luminal lysosomal or vacuolar hydrolases into the cytoplasm. In <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>, LMP can be induced by antifungals and endoplasmic reticulum stressors when calcineurin also has been inactivated. A genome-wide screen revealed Pib2, a relative of LAPF/phafin1 that regulates LMP in mammals, as a pro-LMP protein in yeast. Pib2 associated with vacuolar and endosomal limiting membranes in unstressed cells in a manner that depended on its FYVE domain and on phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI(3)P) biosynthesis. Genetic experiments suggest that Pib2 stimulates the activity of TORC1, a vacuole-associated protein kinase that is sensitive to rapamycin, in a pathway parallel to the Ragulator/EGO complex containing the GTPases Gtr1 and Gtr2. A hyperactivating mutation in the catalytic subunit of TORC1 restored LMP to the gtr1∆ and pib2∆ mutants and also prevented the synthetic lethality of the double mutants. These findings show novel roles of PI(3)P and Pib2 in the regulation of TORC1, which in turn promoted LMP and nonapoptotic death of stressed cells. Rapamycin prevented the death of the pathogenic yeast <i>Candida albicans</i> during exposure to fluconazole plus a calcineurin inhibitor, suggesting that TORC1 broadly promotes sensitivity to fungistats in yeasts.

[Download paper here](https://www.molbiolcell.org/doi/full/10.1091/mbc.e15-08-0581)

Recommended citation: Kim, A. (2015). &quot;A LAPF/phafin1-like protein regulates TORC1 and lysosomal membrane permeabilization in response to endoplasmic reticulum membrane stress&quot; <i>MBOC</i>. Dec 15;26(25):4631-45. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-08-0581. PubMed PMID: 26510498; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4678020.
